Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the microcirculation and local control of blood flow.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the structure of the microcirculation.
The microcirculation is the network of the smallest vessels,
where the exchange of substances between the blood and the tissues takes place,
the purpose for which the whole circulation exists.
It comprises the vessels beyond the small arteries: the arterioles,
the capillaries, and the venules.
The arterioles are the small resistance vessels,
with walls of smooth muscle whose contraction and relaxation control the flow into
the capillary bed and contribute most of the systemic vascular resistance;
the smallest, the terminal arterioles, and in some tissues precapillary sphincters,
regulate flow into individual capillaries.
The capillaries are the exchange vessels:
tiny tubes whose walls are a single layer of endothelium,
sometimes with a basement membrane,
presenting a vast total surface area and a very thin barrier ideal for exchange;
they have no muscle.
The venules collect the blood from the capillaries,
the smallest also permitting some exchange, and lead to the veins.
So the microcirculation comprises the arterioles — the muscular resistance vessels
controlling flow — the capillaries — the thin-walled,
single-endothelial exchange vessels of vast surface area — and the venules that
collect the blood; a structure built for the exchange of substances between blood
and tissues, with the arterioles regulating the flow.
Describe the mechanisms of exchange across the capillary wall.
Exchange across the capillary wall — the transfer of substances between the blood
and the interstitial fluid — occurs by several mechanisms suited to different
substances.
The principal mechanism is diffusion, down concentration gradients:
lipid-soluble substances, importantly the respiratory gases oxygen and carbon
dioxide, diffuse directly through the endothelial cells across the whole surface,
while water-soluble substances, such as glucose and ions,
diffuse through the water-filled clefts between the endothelial cells;
diffusion is rapid and efficient because of the vast surface area and short
distances, and is the main route for nutrient and gas exchange.
A second mechanism is bulk flow — the filtration and reabsorption of fluid governed
by the Starling forces, the balance of hydrostatic and oncotic pressures — which
moves fluid but accounts for little net solute exchange.
A third, for large molecules, is transcytosis in vesicles.
The permeability of the capillary varies between tissues,
from the tight continuous capillaries of the brain to the fenestrated and
discontinuous ones elsewhere.
So capillary exchange occurs chiefly by diffusion — lipid-soluble substances and
gases through the cells, water-soluble through the clefts,
driven by concentration gradients over a vast area — with bulk flow by the Starling
forces moving fluid, and transcytosis for large molecules;
the dominant mechanism for nutrient and gas exchange being diffusion.
Describe the local regulation of blood flow and autoregulation.
Tissues are able to regulate their own blood flow according to their needs,
largely independently of the nervous system,
through local control acting on the arterioles,
and a key expression of this is autoregulation.
Autoregulation is the intrinsic ability of a tissue to maintain a relatively
constant blood flow despite changes in the perfusion pressure,
over a range of pressures.
Plotted as blood flow on the vertical axis against the perfusion pressure on the
horizontal axis, autoregulation appears as a plateau — the flow held nearly
constant across a wide middle range of pressures — with flow rising and falling
with pressure only at the extremes beyond the limits of regulation.
It is achieved by the arterioles adjusting their diameter: when pressure rises,
they constrict to maintain constant flow; when it falls, they dilate.
This is well developed in organs needing a stable flow — the brain,
the heart and the kidney.
So tissues regulate their own blood flow locally through the arterioles,
and autoregulation — seen as a plateau of nearly constant flow across a range of
perfusion pressures — maintains a stable flow despite pressure changes by
arteriolar constriction or dilatation;
an intrinsic protection of flow well developed in the brain, heart and kidney.
What are the mechanisms of local blood-flow control?
Local blood flow is controlled by several intrinsic mechanisms acting on the
arteriolar smooth muscle, which together produce autoregulation and match flow to
metabolic need.
The myogenic mechanism is the intrinsic response of the vascular smooth muscle to
stretch: when the pressure rises and stretches the arteriole, the muscle contracts,
and when pressure falls it relaxes — directly tending to keep flow constant,
a major contributor to autoregulation.
The metabolic mechanism matches flow to the tissue's activity:
the local accumulation of the products of metabolism — such as carbon dioxide,
hydrogen ions, potassium, adenosine and a low oxygen — causes vasodilatation,
so that an active, metabolising tissue, or one whose flow has been inadequate,
dilates its vessels to increase flow;
this underlies the matching of flow to demand and the phenomena of hyperaemia.
The endothelium also contributes, releasing vasodilators, notably nitric oxide,
and vasoconstrictors such as endothelin.
So local blood flow is controlled by the myogenic response of smooth muscle to
stretch, by the metabolic vasodilatation produced by the products of activity and
by hypoxia, and by endothelial mediators such as nitric oxide — mechanisms that
together produce autoregulation and match the flow of each tissue to its metabolic
needs.
Describe active and reactive hyperaemia.
Hyperaemia is an increase in blood flow to a tissue,
and two forms illustrate the metabolic control of the circulation.
Active, or functional, hyperaemia is the increase in blood flow that accompanies an
increase in the metabolic activity of a tissue:
when a tissue becomes more active — a muscle exercising,
a gland secreting — its increased metabolism and consumption of oxygen,
and the accumulation of vasodilator metabolites, cause local vasodilatation,
increasing the blood flow to match the raised demand.
This is the everyday matching of perfusion to activity.
Reactive hyperaemia is the transient increase in blood flow that follows a period
of arrested flow: when the blood supply to a tissue is occluded and then released,
the flow on release temporarily exceeds the normal level.
This occurs because, during the occlusion,
vasodilator metabolites accumulate and oxygen falls, dilating the vessels,
so that on release the dilated bed allows a surge of flow, repaying the deficit,
until the metabolites are washed out.
So active hyperaemia is the increase in flow matching a rise in tissue metabolic
activity, and reactive hyperaemia is the surge of flow following the release of an
occlusion — both produced by the metabolic vasodilatation that accumulates with
activity or during ischaemia, demonstrating the local matching of flow to metabolic
need.
Describe the neural and hormonal control of the blood vessels.
Beyond local control, the blood vessels are regulated by the nervous system and by
circulating hormones, chiefly to serve the whole-body control of blood pressure and
the distribution of flow.
The dominant neural control is sympathetic: most blood vessels,
particularly the arterioles and veins,
receive sympathetic vasoconstrictor fibres releasing noradrenaline onto
alpha-adrenoceptors, causing vasoconstriction;
a continuous background sympathetic tone keeps the vessels partly constricted,
so that increasing or decreasing this tone constricts or dilates them,
adjusting the systemic vascular resistance and the venous capacitance — central to
the baroreceptor reflex.
The hormonal controls include circulating adrenaline and noradrenaline,
angiotensin two and antidiuretic hormone, which are vasoconstrictors,
and the natriuretic peptides and others that dilate.
These systemic controls can override local control to serve the needs of the whole
body, as in diverting blood from the skin and gut to the muscles in exercise,
or maintaining pressure in haemorrhage.
So the blood vessels are controlled neurally,
chiefly by sympathetic vasoconstrictor tone acting through alpha-adrenoceptors to
set vascular resistance and venous capacitance,
and hormonally by vasoconstrictors such as angiotensin and circulating
catecholamines and by vasodilators — systemic controls that serve whole-body
blood-pressure regulation and the distribution of flow,
able to override local control.
Describe the venous system and venous return.
The venous system returns blood from the tissues to the heart,
but it has a further crucial role as the major reservoir of the blood volume,
and its properties are important to the filling of the heart.
The veins are thin-walled and highly distensible, far more compliant than arteries,
so they hold the majority of the blood volume — around two-thirds — at low
pressure, acting as a capacitance reservoir.
By altering their tone, through sympathetic activity,
the veins can shift blood between this reservoir and the active circulation:
venoconstriction reduces the capacitance and shifts blood centrally,
increasing the venous return and cardiac filling,
while venodilatation pools blood peripherally.
Venous return is driven by the small pressure gradient from the periphery to the
right atrium, aided by the skeletal muscle pump — contracting muscles squeezing the
veins — the respiratory pump, and the one-way venous valves that prevent backflow.
So the venous system returns blood to the heart and serves as the major capacitance
reservoir, holding most of the blood volume at low pressure;
venous tone shifts blood between this reservoir and the circulation to adjust
cardiac filling, and venous return is aided by the muscle and respiratory pumps and
the venous valves — the venous side being a key, and often underappreciated,
determinant of cardiac filling and output.
What is the relevance of the microcirculation and local blood-flow control to
anaesthesia?
The microcirculation and the control of blood flow are of great relevance to
anaesthesia, because the ultimate aim is the adequate perfusion of the tissues,
which occurs at the microcirculatory level,
and because anaesthesia and critical illness affect it.
Autoregulation matters: the anaesthetist maintains the perfusion pressure within
the autoregulatory range of vital organs, the brain, heart and kidney,
and recognises that disease, and anaesthetic agents,
can impair or shift autoregulation, making perfusion pressure-dependent.
The vasoactive drugs used to manage blood pressure act on the arteriolar and venous
smooth muscle of this system.
The venous capacitance is important:
anaesthetic-induced venodilatation reduces venous return and is a major cause of
hypotension, and fluids and venoconstrictors address it.
In sepsis, the microcirculation is profoundly disturbed,
with maldistribution of flow and impaired extraction despite an adequate global
circulation.
So the microcirculation and local flow control are central to anaesthesia:
maintaining perfusion pressure within the autoregulatory range of vital organs,
using vasoactive drugs that act on this system,
managing the venous capacitance whose dilatation causes hypotension,
and recognising the microcirculatory failure of sepsis — the microcirculation being
where the goal of tissue perfusion is finally realised.
Pull it together: how is blood flow matched to the needs of the tissues?
I would draw it together around the principle that the circulation exists to
perfuse the tissues at the microcirculatory level,
and that flow is matched to need by the interplay of local and systemic control
acting on the vessels.
At the local level, each tissue regulates its own flow through its arterioles:
the myogenic response and, above all,
the metabolic vasodilatation produced by the products of activity match the flow to
the tissue's metabolic demand, with autoregulation maintaining a stable flow
despite pressure changes, and the endothelium contributing through nitric oxide and
other mediators.
At the systemic level, the neural and hormonal controls — chiefly sympathetic
vasoconstrictor tone — set the overall vascular resistance and the venous
capacitance to regulate the blood pressure and to distribute flow between organs
according to the body's priorities, able to override local control.
The venous reservoir adjusts cardiac filling.
So blood flow is matched to the needs of the tissues by the integration of local
control — metabolic and myogenic autoregulation matching each tissue's flow to its
demand — with systemic neural and hormonal control setting the blood pressure and
distributing flow between organs; a balance between local autonomy and central
coordination that delivers blood where and when it is needed,
the final purpose of the cardiovascular system.
Describe the different types of capillary.
Capillaries are not uniform; their wall structure varies between tissues according
to the exchange that tissue requires,
in three main types of increasing permeability.
The continuous capillaries are the commonest and least permeable:
their endothelial cells form a complete, continuous lining joined by junctions,
with only narrow intercellular clefts,
allowing the exchange of small water-soluble molecules through the clefts and of
lipid-soluble substances through the cells; they are found in muscle, skin,
lung and, in their tightest form with sealed junctions, the brain,
where they form the blood-brain barrier.
The fenestrated capillaries have pores, or fenestrations,
in their endothelial cells, making them more permeable to water and small solutes;
they are found where greater exchange of fluid and solutes is needed — the kidney,
the gut mucosa and the endocrine glands.
The discontinuous, or sinusoidal, capillaries have large gaps between the cells and
an incomplete basement membrane, allowing even large molecules and cells to pass;
they are found in the liver, spleen and bone marrow.
So capillaries are of three types of increasing permeability: continuous,
with tight junctions, in muscle, skin and the brain; fenestrated, with pores,
in the kidney, gut and endocrine glands; and discontinuous, or sinusoidal,
with large gaps, in the liver, spleen and marrow — the wall structure matched to
the exchange each tissue requires.
Describe the role of the endothelium in regulating vascular tone.
The vascular endothelium, far from being a passive lining,
is an active organ that regulates vascular tone by releasing vasoactive substances,
responding to physical and chemical stimuli,
and is central to the local control of blood flow.
Its most important product is nitric oxide, a vasodilator:
the endothelium continuously releases nitric oxide,
which diffuses to the underlying smooth muscle and relaxes it,
and its release is increased by the shear stress of flowing blood and by agents
such as acetylcholine and bradykinin — so that increased flow causes flow-mediated
dilatation, and the endothelium matches vessel calibre to flow.
The endothelium also produces prostacyclin, another vasodilator, and,
on the other side, vasoconstrictors, notably endothelin,
a powerful and long-acting constrictor.
The balance of these mediators sets the local tone,
and the loss of the normal endothelial vasodilator function — endothelial
dysfunction — is an early feature of vascular disease such as atherosclerosis and
hypertension.
So the endothelium actively regulates vascular tone by releasing vasodilators —
chiefly nitric oxide, increased by shear stress to give flow-mediated dilatation,
and prostacyclin — and vasoconstrictors such as endothelin;
the balance setting local tone, and its disturbance, endothelial dysfunction,
being an early feature of vascular disease,
with nitric oxide also a target of drugs such as the nitrates.
Describe the special features of the coronary circulation.
The coronary circulation, supplying the heart itself,
has special features reflecting the unique demands and mechanics of the myocardium.
First, its flow is phasic, varying through the cardiac cycle in an unusual way:
because the contracting myocardium compresses the intramural vessels during
systole, the left coronary flow actually falls during systole and occurs
predominantly during diastole, when the muscle relaxes — so the heart perfuses
itself mainly in diastole, and a short diastole, as in tachycardia,
limits coronary flow.
Second, the myocardium extracts oxygen almost maximally even at rest,
so there is little extraction reserve and increased demand must be met by increased
flow.
Third, coronary flow is therefore strongly regulated by metabolic autoregulation,
tightly matched to myocardial oxygen demand,
principally through local metabolites and adenosine,
with a wide capacity to increase — the coronary reserve.
So the coronary circulation is distinctive in its phasic,
predominantly diastolic flow — because systolic compression impedes flow — in the
near-maximal resting oxygen extraction leaving little reserve,
and in its strong metabolic autoregulation matching flow to demand with a
substantial coronary reserve; features that make the heart's perfusion dependent on
diastolic time and pressure and vulnerable when these or the coronary vessels are
compromised.
Describe the special features of the cerebral circulation.
The cerebral circulation, supplying the brain,
has special features reflecting the brain's high and constant metabolic needs and
its vulnerability, and is of great anaesthetic importance.
First, the brain has a high, continuous oxygen and glucose demand and almost no
reserve, so it depends on a constant,
adequate blood flow and is rapidly damaged by interruption.
Second, cerebral blood flow is therefore tightly autoregulated,
held nearly constant over a wide range of mean arterial pressures by myogenic and
metabolic mechanisms, protecting the brain from changes in perfusion pressure —
though the autoregulatory range can be shifted, as in chronic hypertension,
and impaired by injury.
Third, cerebral blood flow is powerfully influenced by the arterial carbon dioxide,
rising with hypercapnia and falling with hypocapnia,
and to a lesser extent by oxygen; and it is closely coupled to cerebral metabolic
activity — flow-metabolism coupling.
Fourth, the blood-brain barrier protects the cerebral environment.
So the cerebral circulation is distinctive in serving a high,
constant demand with little reserve;
in its tight autoregulation maintaining constant flow over a range of pressures;
in its strong responsiveness to carbon dioxide and its coupling of flow to
metabolism; and in the blood-brain barrier — features central to neuroanaesthesia,
where maintaining cerebral perfusion and manipulating flow through carbon dioxide
and pressure are key concerns.
Describe the formation and drainage of the interstitial fluid and the role of
lymphatics here.
At the microcirculatory level, the continuous formation and drainage of
interstitial fluid maintains the medium that bathes the cells,
governed by the balance of the Starling forces and the lymphatic drainage.
The interstitial fluid is formed by the filtration of fluid from the capillaries,
driven by the balance of the hydrostatic and oncotic pressures across the capillary
wall — the capillary hydrostatic pressure favouring filtration outward,
and the plasma oncotic pressure favouring reabsorption inward.
In the revised understanding, there is a small net filtration along the length of
most capillaries.
This filtered fluid, together with the small amount of protein that escapes the
capillaries, must be returned to the circulation,
and this is the role of the lymphatic system:
the lymphatic capillaries take up the interstitial fluid and protein and return
them, via the lymph nodes and the thoracic duct, to the venous circulation.
This drainage is essential to prevent the accumulation of fluid — oedema.
So the interstitial fluid is continuously formed by capillary filtration governed
by the Starling forces, with a small net filtration in most tissues,
and is drained by the lymphatic system,
which returns the fluid and escaped protein to the circulation — a balance whose
disturbance, by altered Starling forces or impaired lymphatic drainage,
causes oedema, the medium of the cells being maintained by this continuous turnover.
Describe the microcirculatory changes in shock and sepsis.
The microcirculation is the final common site at which shock — inadequate tissue
perfusion — causes its damage, and its disturbance is central to the
pathophysiology of shock and especially of sepsis.
In hypovolaemic and cardiogenic shock,
the fall in cardiac output and blood pressure triggers intense sympathetic
vasoconstriction, which maintains pressure and diverts the reduced flow to vital
organs but at the cost of underperfusing others; if prolonged,
the ischaemic microcirculation is damaged, with loss of autoregulation,
capillary leak and, eventually, failure of the vessels to respond.
In sepsis, the disturbance is more complex and profound:
there is widespread inappropriate vasodilatation,
lowering the systemic vascular resistance and blood pressure — distributive shock —
driven by mediators including excess nitric oxide;
there is increased capillary permeability with leak of fluid;
there is maldistribution of the microcirculatory flow,
with some areas overperfused and others underperfused;
and the tissues may fail to extract and use oxygen despite an adequate or high
global delivery.
So in shock the microcirculation is the site of injury:
in hypovolaemic and cardiogenic shock,
sympathetic vasoconstriction protects vital organs but underperfuses others,
damaging the microcirculation if prolonged; in sepsis, there is vasodilatation,
capillary leak, maldistribution of flow,
and impaired oxygen extraction — the microcirculatory failure underlying the organ
damage of shock, and a target of resuscitation.
Describe the autonomic control of the heart and vessels in the integrated
cardiovascular response.
The autonomic nervous system provides the rapid,
coordinated control of the whole cardiovascular system,
integrating the heart and the vessels to regulate blood pressure and distribute
flow, directed by the cardiovascular centres in the medulla.
The sympathetic division acts widely: on the heart, through beta-one receptors,
increasing the rate, contractility and conduction; on the arterioles,
through alpha receptors, causing vasoconstriction to raise the systemic vascular
resistance; and on the veins, causing venoconstriction to reduce capacitance and
increase venous return — so a generalised sympathetic activation raises cardiac
output, resistance and venous return together, raising pressure.
The parasympathetic division acts mainly on the heart, through the vagus,
slowing the rate and conduction, with little direct effect on most vessels.
The cardiovascular centres integrate the inputs — from the baroreceptors,
chemoreceptors, higher centres and others — and adjust this autonomic outflow
continuously.
So the autonomic system coordinates the cardiovascular response:
the sympathetic division increasing heart rate, contractility,
vascular resistance and venous return to raise pressure and output,
the parasympathetic slowing the heart,
integrated by the medullary cardiovascular centres responding to the reflex inputs
— the rapid controller that, in concert with local and hormonal mechanisms,
matches the circulation to the body's needs.
Summarise how the cardiovascular system delivers blood to meet tissue needs.
I would draw the whole cardiovascular physiology together around its single
purpose: the delivery of an adequate,
appropriately distributed blood flow to meet the metabolic needs of every tissue,
moment by moment.
The heart pumps the cardiac output, the product of rate and stroke volume,
regulated by preload, afterload, contractility and rate and matched to venous
return by Frank-Starling's law.
The arterial system, through its compliance,
delivers this as a smoothed flow at a pressure — the product of cardiac output and
systemic vascular resistance — regulated by the baroreceptor reflex and the
renal-hormonal control of volume.
The arterioles control the distribution of flow,
each tissue setting its own by local autoregulation and metabolic control,
overridden when necessary by systemic sympathetic control.
The flow reaches the microcirculation, where exchange occurs across the capillaries.
The venous system returns the blood and stores the reserve volume.
All is coordinated by the autonomic system and local mechanisms.
So the cardiovascular system delivers blood to meet tissue needs by integrating the
pumping of the regulated cardiac output,
its delivery at a controlled pressure through the compliant arteries,
its distribution by locally and centrally controlled arterioles,
its exchange in the microcirculation,
and its return through the venous reservoir — an integrated system matching
perfusion to the needs of the whole body and each part,
the foundation of cardiovascular management in anaesthesia.
Describe the special features of the renal circulation.
The renal circulation is remarkable both for its size and for its unique
arrangement, adapted to the kidney's function of filtering the plasma.
The kidneys receive a very large blood flow — around a fifth of the cardiac output
— far in excess of their metabolic needs,
because the flow serves filtration rather than oxygen supply.
The arrangement is unique in having two capillary beds in series:
the blood passes first through the high-pressure glomerular capillaries,
where filtration occurs, and then, via the efferent arteriole,
through the low-pressure peritubular capillaries surrounding the tubules,
where reabsorption occurs.
The glomerular filtration rate and renal blood flow are tightly autoregulated,
held nearly constant over a wide range of perfusion pressures by the myogenic
response and by tubuloglomerular feedback,
which adjusts the afferent and efferent arteriolar tone — protecting filtration
against fluctuations in pressure.
So the renal circulation receives a fifth of the cardiac output,
far more than its metabolic need, arranged uniquely as two capillary beds in series
— the high-pressure glomerular for filtration and the low-pressure peritubular for
reabsorption — with filtration and flow autoregulated by the myogenic response and
tubuloglomerular feedback; an arrangement central to renal function and vulnerable
to hypoperfusion in anaesthesia.
Describe the cutaneous circulation and its role in thermoregulation.
The cutaneous circulation is specialised less for the metabolic needs of the skin
than for thermoregulation, serving as the body's principal route for losing or
conserving heat, and its blood flow can vary enormously for this purpose.
The skin contains, in addition to its ordinary capillaries,
specialised arteriovenous anastomoses — direct connections between arterioles and
venules, particularly in the hands, feet,
ears and face — that can shunt large volumes of blood through the superficial
venous plexuses near the surface, or bypass them.
These are controlled almost entirely by the sympathetic nervous system as part of
central thermoregulation.
When the body is hot, the sympathetic vasoconstrictor tone is withdrawn and active
vasodilatation occurs, opening the anastomoses and greatly increasing skin blood
flow, bringing warm blood to the surface to lose heat.
When cold, intense sympathetic vasoconstriction reduces skin flow, conserving heat.
So the cutaneous circulation is specialised for thermoregulation,
with arteriovenous anastomoses under sympathetic control that, on heating,
open to bring blood to the surface to lose heat, and on cooling,
constrict to conserve it — a circulation whose role in heat exchange is central to
perioperative temperature management.
Describe the coronary circulation in more detail.
The coronary circulation supplies the heart muscle,
and it has several special features dictated by the heart's high and continuous
oxygen demand and by the mechanical effects of its own contraction.
The myocardium has a very high oxygen extraction even at rest — extracting most of
the oxygen from the coronary blood — so that, unlike other tissues,
it cannot meet increased demand by extracting more,
and must do so almost entirely by increasing coronary blood flow,
which it matches closely to demand by metabolic local control.
A distinctive feature is the timing of flow:
because the contracting myocardium compresses the intramural vessels during
systole, most of the coronary flow to the left ventricle occurs during diastole,
when the muscle relaxes — so the coronary perfusion pressure is essentially the
aortic diastolic pressure minus the ventricular pressure, and a short diastole,
as in tachycardia, or a low diastolic pressure, reduces coronary flow.
So the coronary circulation supplies a tissue of high,
continuous oxygen demand with near-maximal extraction at rest,
so flow must rise to meet demand, by metabolic control;
and because systolic compression impedes flow,
the left ventricle is perfused mainly in diastole — features making the heart
vulnerable to ischaemia when demand rises or diastolic pressure or time falls,
central to anaesthetic care of the cardiac patient.
Describe the cerebral circulation and the blood-brain barrier.
The cerebral circulation supplies the brain,
an organ with a high and continuous metabolic demand and no capacity to store
energy or tolerate interruption of its supply,
so its blood flow is protected by powerful regulatory mechanisms and its
composition guarded by a special barrier.
The cerebral blood flow is tightly autoregulated,
held nearly constant over a wide range of mean arterial pressures by the myogenic
response, so that perfusion is maintained despite fluctuations in pressure,
failing only at the extremes.
It is also exquisitely sensitive to the arterial carbon dioxide,
which is a powerful regulator, and to the arterial oxygen and to local metabolic
activity, which couples flow to neuronal activity.
The blood-brain barrier is the specialised,
tight endothelium of the cerebral capillaries,
whose tight junctions and lack of fenestrations exclude most large and polar
molecules, protecting the neurons' environment and tightly controlling what enters
— important for the access of drugs to the brain.
So the cerebral circulation is protected by tight autoregulation over a wide
pressure range, powerful carbon-dioxide reactivity,
and coupling of flow to metabolism, while the blood-brain barrier,
formed by tight cerebral capillary endothelium,
controls the brain's chemical environment — mechanisms central to neuroanaesthesia
and the management of brain perfusion.
Describe the regulation of skeletal muscle blood flow at rest and in exercise.
Skeletal muscle blood flow shows one of the widest ranges of any tissue,
because its metabolic demand varies enormously between rest and vigorous exercise,
and its regulation illustrates the interplay of neural and local control.
At rest, muscle has a relatively low blood flow,
much of its vasculature held constricted by a background sympathetic
vasoconstrictor tone, with many capillaries unperfused.
On exercise, the flow can increase many-fold,
by metabolic local control overriding the neural tone:
the local accumulation of the products of metabolism — a fall in oxygen,
a rise in carbon dioxide, potassium,
adenosine and other metabolites — causes a powerful local vasodilatation precisely
matched to the metabolic rate, and recruits previously unperfused capillaries,
reducing diffusion distances.
This metabolic hyperaemia is the dominant mechanism in exercise.
The rhythmic contraction of muscle also pumps blood through the veins,
aiding venous return.
So skeletal muscle blood flow is low at rest under sympathetic vasoconstrictor
tone, but in exercise rises many-fold through metabolic vasodilatation by
accumulated metabolites, with capillary recruitment reducing diffusion distance,
the muscle pump aiding venous return — a circulation matching a hugely variable
flow to demand, important in the cardiovascular response to exercise.
Describe vasomotion and capillary recruitment.
Vasomotion and capillary recruitment are two related features of how the
microcirculation regulates the perfusion of the capillary bed,
allowing it to match the surface area available for exchange to the local need.
Vasomotion is the rhythmic, oscillating contraction and relaxation of the small
arterioles and the precapillary sphincters,
which causes the flow through individual capillaries to wax and wane rather than
being steady; it is an intrinsic property of the vascular smooth muscle,
modulated by local conditions.
Its functional effect is that, at any moment,
only a proportion of the capillaries in a resting tissue are perfused,
the perfused ones varying over time.
Capillary recruitment is the increase in the number of capillaries simultaneously
perfused when the tissue's demand rises — as in exercising muscle — brought about
by relaxation of the precapillary sphincters and arterioles.
Recruiting more capillaries increases the surface area for exchange and reduces the
diffusion distance between blood and cells,
enhancing the delivery of oxygen and nutrients.
So vasomotion is the rhythmic oscillation of arteriolar tone causing intermittent
capillary perfusion, so that only some capillaries are perfused at rest,
while capillary recruitment increases the number perfused when demand rises,
expanding the exchange surface and reducing diffusion distance — mechanisms
matching capillary perfusion to metabolic need.
Describe the endothelial vasoactive substances, including endothelin.
The endothelium regulates vascular tone by producing both vasodilator and
vasoconstrictor substances, whose balance sets the local tone,
and which act mainly in a local, paracrine fashion on the underlying smooth muscle.
The principal endothelial vasodilators are nitric oxide, which we have discussed,
acting through cyclic guanosine monophosphate; prostacyclin,
a prostanoid acting through cyclic adenosine monophosphate,
which also inhibits platelets; and the endothelium-derived hyperpolarising factor.
Opposing these are the endothelial vasoconstrictors, chief among them endothelin,
one of the most potent vasoconstrictors known,
a peptide whose sustained action contributes to vascular tone and, in excess,
to disease; the endothelium also generates a constrictor prostanoid and contributes
to the formation of angiotensin.
In health these opposing influences are balanced,
with the vasodilator nitric oxide tending to predominate to give a net vasodilator
tone; endothelial dysfunction shifts the balance towards vasoconstriction.
So the endothelium produces opposing vasoactive substances — the vasodilators
nitric oxide, prostacyclin and the hyperpolarising factor,
and the vasoconstrictors, chiefly the potent peptide endothelin — whose balance,
normally favouring vasodilatation, sets local vascular tone;
its disturbance in endothelial dysfunction contributing to vascular disease.
Describe the microcirculation in sepsis.
Sepsis profoundly disturbs the microcirculation,
and this microcirculatory dysfunction is central to the organ failure of sepsis,
illustrating what happens when microvascular regulation fails.
In sepsis, the overwhelming inflammatory response damages the endothelium and
disrupts the normal control of the microcirculation in several ways.
There is widespread, inappropriate vasodilatation,
particularly from the excessive production of nitric oxide,
contributing to the profound hypotension and the loss of vascular tone of
distributive shock.
The endothelium becomes leaky, with damage to the glycocalyx,
so that fluid and protein escape into the tissues,
causing oedema and reducing the circulating volume.
The microcirculation becomes heterogeneous,
with some capillaries overperfused and others underperfused or obstructed by
microthrombi and by leucocytes, so that oxygen delivery to the tissues is
maldistributed and impaired despite an adequate or high overall cardiac output — a
failure of extraction.
So in sepsis the microcirculation fails through excessive nitric-oxide-mediated
vasodilatation causing distributive shock,
endothelial and glycocalyx damage causing leak and oedema,
and heterogeneous perfusion with microthrombi impairing oxygen extraction despite
adequate global flow — a microcirculatory failure central to septic organ
dysfunction and a target of its management.
Describe ischaemia-reperfusion injury.
Ischaemia-reperfusion injury is the paradoxical phenomenon in which the restoration
of blood flow to a tissue that has been ischaemic causes further injury,
beyond that of the ischaemia itself,
and it is relevant wherever flow is interrupted and restored — in vascular surgery,
transplantation, the use of tourniquets, and after cardiac arrest.
During the ischaemic period, the lack of oxygen halts oxidative metabolism,
depletes the cell's energy, and causes the accumulation of products and of calcium,
priming the tissue for injury.
When flow and oxygen are restored, instead of simple recovery,
a burst of reactive oxygen species is generated,
overwhelming the antioxidant defences and damaging cell membranes and structures;
the restoration also triggers an inflammatory response,
with activation of leucocytes and the complement and clotting systems,
and calcium overload, which together injure the cells and the microvasculature,
sometimes causing the no-reflow phenomenon where capillary flow is not restored.
So ischaemia-reperfusion injury is the additional damage caused when blood flow is
restored to ischaemic tissue, through a burst of reactive oxygen species,
an inflammatory response and calcium overload,
injuring cells and the microcirculation — relevant to tourniquet use,
vascular surgery, transplantation and resuscitation,
and a target for protective strategies.
Summarise the local control of blood flow and its integration with the whole
circulation.
I would draw it together around the principle that the microcirculation is where
the whole cardiovascular system fulfils its purpose — the exchange of oxygen,
nutrients and wastes — and that its perfusion is controlled both locally,
to match each tissue's need, and centrally, to serve the whole body.
Locally, each tissue regulates its own blood flow by autoregulation,
keeping flow constant despite pressure changes through the myogenic response,
and by metabolic control, matching flow to metabolic rate through the vasodilator
effect of accumulated metabolites, with the endothelium contributing through nitric
oxide and other substances, and capillary recruitment expanding the exchange
surface.
These local mechanisms are overridden when necessary by the central,
neural and hormonal control, chiefly the sympathetic nervous system,
which can constrict regional beds to redistribute flow and maintain the arterial
pressure for the whole body — as in haemorrhage, where flow is diverted from skin,
gut and muscle to protect the heart and brain.
So local control — autoregulation and metabolic and endothelial mechanisms —
matches each tissue's flow to its need,
integrated with and overridden by the central neural and hormonal control that
serves the whole circulation; the microcirculation thus balancing local and global
demands, and being where perfusion ultimately succeeds or fails in anaesthesia and
critical illness.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. That concludes the station.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The microcirculation comprises the arterioles (muscular resistance vessels
controlling flow and contributing most systemic vascular resistance),
the capillaries (thin-walled single-endothelial exchange vessels of vast surface
area, no muscle) and the venules; built for exchange between blood and tissues with
the arterioles regulating flow.
Second, Capillary exchange is chiefly by diffusion — lipid-soluble substances and
gases through the endothelial cells,
water-soluble substances through the inter-cellular clefts,
driven by concentration gradients over a vast area — with bulk flow by the Starling
forces moving fluid and transcytosis for large molecules;
capillary permeability varies (tight in brain, fenestrated/discontinuous elsewhere).
Third, Tissues regulate their own flow via the arterioles;
autoregulation (a plateau of nearly constant flow across a range of perfusion
pressures) is produced by the myogenic response (smooth muscle contracting when
stretched) and metabolic vasodilatation (CO2, H+, K+, adenosine, low O2),
with endothelial mediators (nitric oxide, endothelin) — well developed in brain,
heart and kidney.
Fourth, Active hyperaemia matches increased flow to raised tissue activity;
reactive hyperaemia is the flow surge after releasing an occlusion — both from
metabolic vasodilatation.
Systemically, vessels are controlled by sympathetic vasoconstrictor tone
(alpha-adrenoceptors) setting vascular resistance and venous capacitance,
and by hormones (angiotensin, catecholamines), able to override local control.
Fifth, The venous system returns blood and is the major capacitance reservoir
(~two-thirds of blood volume at low pressure);
venous tone shifts blood to adjust cardiac filling.
Clinically: maintain perfusion pressure within organs' autoregulatory range
(impaired/shifted by disease and anaesthetics),
manage venous capacitance (anaesthetic venodilatation causes hypotension),
use vasoactive drugs acting on this system,
and recognise microcirculatory failure in sepsis.
Thank you. That concludes the station.